Now we're gonna be doing
a little bit of coding.
And we're gonna be talking
first about CSS transitions and
especially how they
differ from animations.
So, in a general sense, a transition
is the in between, between states.
So that's why,
with some animation libraries and
tools you've also heard of them?
I'm referring to what are called twins.
And so these twins are, like I said,
the in between states of like you have one
discrete state and another discrete state.
And he wanna you can just go
between those states over time.
So you could transition and a lot of
things in CSS like we talked about.
You could transition color,
even things like font size which
again I don't recommend you doing.
And things like transforms and opacity.
So you use transitions when
you wanna define a way like
just it's not a strictly
defined animation,
it's more like I am gonna say what
each of the states are in CSS.
And I just want CSS to be responsible for
smoothly transitioning between
those states and not really caring about
exactly what happens between those states.
But instead of saying, get me from point A
to point B in the smoothest way possible.
All right, so to do CSS transitions, we're
gonna be working from this file over here.
It's called 01_transitions.
And so in the index.HTML we
have a simple form over here.
And I'm gonna get rid of this on click.
And so this form hasn't input any button.
So this is the basic thing that we're
gonna be animating in this exercise,
but first we're gonna be of
course talking about what
transitions actually look like in CSS.
Okay so let me delete this.
Let's go back to our scratch pad.
Let's say that we wanna animate
this fall in different states.
So first of all,
there's a lot of states in CSS which
are built into to each of the elements.
And you could toggle these states
like by going over here and
clicking this :hov which stands for
hover in styles.
And so there's a few elements states that
you could toggle between such as active,
focus, focus within, target,
hover, visited or focus visible.
So we're gonna be using hover just
because that's an easy way to show
the difference between different states.
And I'm gonna be setting
a solid background color for
this just to illustrate.
And let's see that when we
hover over the ball, so, hover.
We want the backgrounds
to instead be blue.
So what's gonna happen right now
is that when I hover over it,
it's gonna immediately transition to blue.
And the reason is because there
is no transition to find.
No transition of any
length of time to find so
it's just gonna immediately go to blue.
So there's a few properties that we could
talk about to define how to smoothly
transition between these two stats
from this reddish color to blue.
And so
the first one is transition-property.
And so this is gonna be the property
that we wanna transition.
It's telling the browser, hey,
this is what we wanna smoothly animate
from one state to another state.
So I'm gonna set this to background, or
you could even do background color because
background is actually a shorthand for
various things like background color,
background, position, size, etc.
But we'll just do background for now.
And so this alone won't do anything.
We're still gonna get it
immediately gonna blue.
So we're also gonna set
a transition in duration.
And just like we talked about,
this is how long it takes to
get from one state to another.
And so let's set this to one second.
So now when we hover,
it's actually going pretty smoothly
transition from red to blue.
It feels nice, it's not even linear.
So let's take a look at
what's happening over here.
We're gonna move this up a little bit.
All right, so we have the transition
property and the transition duration.
The default transition easing, or
the transition timing
function is gonna be ease.
This might be browser specific, but
I believe that for Chrome it is and
so let's change that.
So let's say transition timing
function and make it linear.
Here you're gonna notice it's
not gonna be as smooth or
it's sorta hard to tell
with with colors but,
you could see the transition
timing function over here.
And that's another side note, by the way.
When it comes to movement,
such as changing the transform and
things such as color and opacity,
your timing functions are gonna
feel a little bit different.
Like for example, for the color it
might not even make sense to use
in easing such as ease in or ease and
outer, a custom cubic Bezier.
And you might wanna stick with linear or
you might wanna stick with whatever
the browser the browser default is.
So yeah, let's make a little
bit of a better example here.
I'm actually gonna push this ball to
the left or to the right actually and
just make it in the center,
or almost the center.
Centering in CSS is hard,
actually it's not hard but
like this is almost the center.
And so what we're gonna do is we're
actually gonna change the size now too.
Now, like we talked about, what you really
wanna do is animate the transform and
opacity instead of doing things like
animating the width or the height.
So, that's exactly what we're gonna do.
We are gonna transform and
we are gonna use the scale
value to say hey I want
this to be twice as big.
So now when we hover over it's pretty big.
But it's it's not animating yet.
So does anyone know why it's
not transitioning smoothly?
>> Because we only have
transition property on.
We don't have transition
property on the transform.
>> Exactly.
So we only have a transition
property on the background.
So that's something really useful to know,
like when you define
the property it's only gonna apply
that transition to that property.
Now, if you're lazy, short on time you
could do transition property all and
so that is gonna transition basically
anything that is transition able.
So when we hover over this, we see that
it's getting bigger and then smaller.
But now, let's say, of course,
we only wanna transition.
Let's say we only wanna do the transform
so I could do that and so now you're gonna
see that it's gonna smoothly expand but
it's immediately gonna change to blue.
And immediately changed back to red.
Now, if you have some other properties,
for example,
let's say I add a opacity of 0.5 to hover.
And now let's say that we do wanna
animate the background color and
the transition but we don't wanna animate
or sorry transition the the opacity.
So if we do all it is gonna do
all three of those properties, so
we're gonna have it a little
bit transparency and
it's gonna smoothly animate
to everything there.
But with transition property,
you could actually specify specific
properties that you wanna transition.
So we could say I only wanna transition
the background and the transform.
So now you're gonna see that the opacity
immediately transitions to transparence.
The color smoothly animates and
the transform smoothly animates as well.
Now, additionally and so this is one of
the really interesting things about CSS.
I'm gonna remove the opacity and
we can also specify different
durations for each of the properties.
So I can say that for the background, we
want that to transition over one second,
but the transform, we might wanna
transition that over three seconds.
So now the color has fully
transitioned after one second but
the scale it takes about
three seconds to do it.
Now same thing here if we're okay
with our background transitioning but
we in a linear way but
we wanna change the timing function for
the transform then we could
just change that over here.
So again this is gonna match
up with transform and.
And ease in out is also gonna
match up with transform.
So it's dependent on the order.
And so now,
we're gonna see that it's gonna scale
smoothly over three seconds
from larger to smaller.
So the last thing I wanna talk
about over here is that not only
can you specify just the overall
transition for an element but
you could also have it's
dependent on which state it's in.
So, let's say that when I over out, I so
actually I'm gonna move this over here,
just so that you see.
And we're gonna say transition
duration 0 seconds.
One other quick notes.
You cannot do transition duration zero and
that's because CSS at least for timing.
So for both animations and
transitions it needs to know the unit.
You might think that's a little bit silly
because zero milliseconds is the same
thing as zero seconds but
your animation won't work or
the zero second duration will not work
unless you specify the unit over there.
So that's a code that I found many years
ago and it sorta broke all my animations
so I'm passing it on to you so you not
to make the same mistake that I made.
All right, so
now let's look at what happens.
When you hover over it,
it's gonna smoothly transition but
when you hover out it's
gonna immediately snap back.
And so that goes to show you that we
could actually change the different
transition properties dependent
on which state it's in.
So when we're hovering over it,
it's gonna be taking whatever transition
values you define in that state.
And when it's not hovered,
it's gonna use this quicker duration.
So hover, it's gonna take its time.
I'm gonna help her out.
It's gonna go really fast and snap back.
Now, tying this all
together I always recommend
especially to avoid confusion
to specify each property.
Or yeah, so each declaration
over here transition property,
transition timing function, transition
duration and also even transition delay.
So if we have transition delay of 0.5
seconds, then you could see that when we
hover, it takes half a second before
it actually starts working and
then it's gonna immediately snap back.
Okay, but there is a shorthand for
all of this.
So I'm gonna use all for this and
we are gonna let's get rid of this.
And so we're gonna say transition all.
So these are the properties that you're
using and now the order is important here.
We wanna specify the duration first and
then the delay.
So the duration, we could say 2 seconds.
The delay we could say is 0.5 seconds.
And then we could add
everything else such as
let's say that we just want
this to be ease and out.
And so
what this is gonna be is a shorthand for
all of our transition properties.
Now, if you wanna figure out
which properties this expands to.
Then in the depth tools, you could
click this little carrots over here and
you could see, okay,
we're doing property all.
The duration is 2 seconds,
the timing function is ease-in-out and
the delay is 0.5 seconds.
Now, when I'm trying to remember this,
the most important thing is
the order of duration then delay,
because CSS is actually pretty smart.
So that if you put ease-in-out at
the beginning for whatever reason,
it's still gonna work the same.
So just keep the order of the duration and
the delay in mind any questions?
>> What's the downfall of using all
versus naming each property individually?
>> So the downfall is it's just a matter
of not being explicit if you use all then
there are gonna be things that animate
that you might not wanna animate.
And so we just saw a couple
of examples over here.
So in terms of performance and
things like that, again,
if you're only changing things
like transform and opacity and
maybe things like color, then it's not
gonna affect performance too much.
But then if you need to change to
things like left, or margin or
padding, then those are gonna
fall into that all category.
And now you're gonna run
into performance issues.
So a good way to prevent yourself
from that foot gun is by specifying
the properties.
And also,
let's say that we do accidentally add,
like a wonder how this is
gonna look padding 3rem.
So now when we hover over it.
It's actually gonna, wow.
That was a little weird.
So we might say like you know what,
we actually didn't wanna
animate that padding.
I'd like that that just
looks really weird.
And you can also see some of
the janky happening there too.
So, not really too pleasant.
What you could do is even
if you use the shorthand,
you could specify
the properties after that.
And because of how CSS works,
you are overriding those the expanded
transition properties and saying.
I hate instead of transition all
we actually want these properties.
So now.
It's gonna apply
the padding immediately and
it's gonna smoothly transition
the properties that you specified.
And again if you look over here
we see that this transition
property is being overwritten
by this one down here.
Yeah, so the pretend this is all but
yeah it's overriding all
in just transitioning the background and
the transform.